bill cipher | gravity falls wiki | fandom powered by wikia
fandom
bill cipher
click "expand" for full list
clairvoyancepiano playingcross-dimensional awareness[1]click "expand" for full list
bipper (when possessing dipper)[3]the one-eyed beastthe triangle guyisosceles monster[2]evil triangle[3]the beast with just one eye /&gt;one eyed demon
goal
home
family
friends
gideon gleeful (former)click "expand" for full list
ford pines (former)8 ballkryptoszantharteethkeyholehectorgonamorphous shapeford pinesclick "expand" for full list
stan pinesdipper pinesmabel pinessoos ramirezxyler and craztime baby[source]
bill cipher is a triangular dream demon, formerly existent only in the mindscape, who wished to gain access to the real world. he has been running amok in gravity falls, oregon since being summoned by stanford pines over thirty years ago, and is also known for his mysterious demeanor and sadistic humor. bill is the main a
bill and the symbol he's based on, the eye of providence, appear frequently in gravity falls. he was the unseen creator of the cryptograms in the online game rumble's revenge. his name and existence is deduced by taking all the capital letters in the cryptograms from rumble's revenge, to form the messag
contents
history
background
trillions of years prior to the events of the series, bill cipher originated from the second dimension. bill despised living there, describing it as a dimension of "flat minds in a flat world with flat dreams." he "liberated" his dimension by plunging it into burning chaos, along with everyone he'd ever known, including his own parents. [4] he eventually took over a boiling, shifting intergalactic foam betwee
a prophetic painting of bill's defeat.
without a physical form however, bill could only access the dreams of the third dimension's beings. in order to make his dealings with mortals easier, he took on the name "bill cipher" as his real name would "evaporate one with an expression of horror and ecstasy on their face". [8] among his targets were the natives who lived in what would become the town of gravity falls, oregon.

bill once asked a local shaman named modoc the wise to build an interdimensional gateway to the nightmare realm, but the result was made out of twigs. when modoc learned of the prophecy that foretold of an apocalyptic event that would stem from interactions with bill cipher, he lit himself on fire in an effort to avert it.

the natives eventually discovered a way to defeat bill by using a zodiac with ten symbols. they left behind elaborate cave paintings about their encounter with the demon, including how to summon him, and more importantly, a warning never to read the incantation that would summon bill aloud. the valley was deemed a "cursed land" by the natives, who evacuated around 1000 ad. [9] the ar
bill tricks ford into building a gateway to the nightmare realm.
in the late twentieth century, a young man named stanford pines, who had spent the past six years investigating the town's plethora of unnatural creatures and oddities, hit a roadblock in his research and was left without answers as to how the improbabilities of gravity falls had come to be. during the roadblock, he uncovered the ancient cave containing the ancients' stories of bill cipher. heedless of the warnings, fo
it was bill who revealed to ford that gravity falls' weirdness was caused by a rift between dimensions, through which the other side's weirdness leaked through. with bill's assistance, stanford drafted blueprints to create an inter-dimensional gateway beneath his home, and recruited his college friend fiddleford mcgucket for assistance. as bill and ford's partnership seemingly gr
bill reveals his true nature and ultimate plans to ford.
on january 18, 1982, ford and fiddleford performed their first trial with the active portal, which quickly went awry, as the rope that was attached to the dummy they intended to send through the portal became tangled with fiddleford, sending him briefly through the portal head-first. upon his return, an alienated fiddleford muttered incoherencies before uttering a prediction about "the beast with just one eye." in gravity 
the suspicion planted in him by fiddleford led to a confrontation between ford and bill, during which ford learned that bill had tricked him, as the portal was meant to act as a gateway to the nightmare realm, allowing the demon to bring chaos and destruction into their universe. horrified and betrayed, ford shut down the project and attempted to destroy all knowledge of the portal, before accidentally falling through it himself. bill either could not see ford in the thirty years he spent lost i
events of gravity falls
season 1
bill's entry in journal 2.
bill's entry in journal 3.
bill gives gideon a little present.
"dreamscaperers" is the first time bill is directly addressed and introduced in the series. in an attempt to take over the mystery shack once again, gideon gleeful summons bill. gideon tells him to steal stan pines' safe combination directly from his head, so that gideon can steal the xyler and craz from mabel's imagination. he tricks mabel and soos into looking for the memory of stan's safe combination first, knowing they'd lead him straight to it. at some point soos is separated from everyone else, and bill takes his place. once they find the correct memory he takes it and nearly esca
"i'll be watching you."
dipper returns in a timely manner and tells mabel and soos that while they are in stan's mindscape they can do whatever they want. they battle bill and he is nearly defeated. just as though it seems he will be forced out of stan's head, he puts a stop to everything instead. impressed, he decides to let them go, and after warning them of a mysterious darkness that will change everything they care about, he tells them that he'll be watching them. he leaves in a representation of the zodiac, almost
season 2
bill (left) in dipper's body, alongside a surprised real dipper (right).
bill cipher appears again in "sock opera," when dipper is trying to figure out the password for the laptop from "into the bunker." he offers the laptop's password in return for a favor, but dipper refuses the offer. later, at the moment the laptop is on countdown for complete data erasure after too many failed password entries, he appears again a
bill takes over dipper's body as his "puppet" and destroys the laptop. he then follows mabel to her puppet show in pursuit of dipper's journal, which is being used as a prop in the show. after mabel has been informed of dipper's body having been stolen by him, he finds her with the journal as she is retrieving it for dipper. he almost swindles her out of it but ends up in a fight with her. he ends up losing because m
in "northwest mansion mystery," he appears on a tapestry hovering over a forest fire with two men either begging for mercy or worshiping him while skeletal corpses are underneath them, foreshadowing bad events.

at the end of "the stanchurian candidate," after a prison-bound gideon fails to get his father elected mayor, he is shown to have drawn bill cipher's zodiac on his cell wall and hidden it behind a cat poster. the symbols on the zodiac have been changed around, and
bill deciding on who is to be his next pawn.
in "the last mabelcorn," bill cipher appears in one of ford's dreams, telling him that he's been preparing for "the big day," going on to say that ford can't keep the inter-dimensional rift safe forever. bill throws a copy of the rift down to the ground, opening a red triangular portal in the sky and setting fire to unicorn hair. undeterred, bill decides to possess someone outside the shack instead.

bill possessing blendin.
near the end of "dipper and mabel vs. the future," bill approaches mabel by possessing blendin blandin, recognizing mabel's wishes of wanting summer to never end. bill (as blendin) convinces mabel to give him the inter-dimensional rift, which he says can be used to create a "time bubble" that can make time stop. mabel gives bill the rift, which h
bill gains a physical form.
in "weirdmageddon part 1," after opening the rift, bill gains a physical form and imprisons mabel in a bubble. he introduces himself to the people of gravity falls, claiming to be their new ruler as well as introducing his friends to the people. the townsfolk refuse to submit, but preston northwest welcomes h
bill taunts dipper.
when bill and his friends prepare to cause havoc, ford attempts to shoot bill back into the rift with his quantum destabilizer, but misses. when bill notices ford and dipper, he blasts the clock tower. ford, pinned under rubble, begins to tell dipper that there's another way to defeat bill. he is cut short when bill appears, towering over ford. bill captures ford and presents him to his friends, telling them that weirdmageddon
bill and his friends are later seen having a rave party inside the fearamid. suddenly, the time paradox avoidance enforcement squadron, blendin blandin, and the time baby barge in, attempting to arrest bill for possessing blendin and almost destroying reality. bill vaporizes the time police and time baby instantly, and the party resum
bill sitting on his throne.
in "weirdmageddon 2: escape from reality," bill has been in power for four consecutive days. most of the townsfolk have been petrified and stacked into a "massive throne of frozen human agony" for bill. he announces his plan to take weirdmageddon worldwide, and the demons make their way toward the edge of gravity falls. but instead of esc
later in the episode, bill is angered and unable to understand why he and his friends aren't able to extend their reach and leave gravity falls to dominate the world. he realizes that ford is the only one able to understand the shield and contemplates his next move. he is interrupted by keyhole, who informs him gideon, mabel's jailer, has failed to stop dipper, allowing him and his group to enter mabel's bubble. bill is not worried by this, calling mab
bill resolves to physically torture ford until he lets him inside his mind.
in "weirdmageddon 3: take back the falls," bill reverts ford from his gold state. he explains to ford that he, along with the rest of his friends, can’t escape gravity falls. ford thinks that this is due to a natural magnetism attracting weirdness to gravity falls, the event he’s studied for years, a force so strong that it forms a barrier that prevents that weirdness from going outside the town
bill tries to destroy the shacktron, but is prevented by the "bill-proof" barrier.
bill is later seen torturing ford by blasting him with lasers until he agrees to his deal. though ford is in pain, he still refuses to give in. before bill can start torturing ford again, he is interrupted by the shacktron, a gigantic mech created by old man mcgucket, with the help of dipper, mabel, and various townsfolk. they converted the mystery shack into a powerful machine to fight bill and rescue ford, who knows bill's weakness. bill finds it
everyone lands right next to the human throne, but dipper is unable to figure out how to unfreeze everyone. gideon gleeful, trapped in a cage hanging from the ceiling, explains that mayor tyler is the load-bearing statue in the human throne, and if he’s pulled out, the whole throne will fall apart. when dipper does so, it sets off a chain reaction. as the chair collapses, gideon’s cage is knocked to the ground and breaks, freeing him. t
bill turns everyone but the pines family into tapestries.
bill sends a wave of fire at them, burning the zodiac away. he also traps stan and ford, binding them with ropes. the resistance prepares to fight against bill, but the demon snaps his fingers and turns everyone but the pines into tapestries showing their screaming faces. bill then imprisons dipper and mabel in a triangular cell. bill says he’ll spare the twins if ford lets him into his mind, giving him one last opportunity. the twins yell at ford not to do it, causing bill to angrily fly up to 
bill vanishes from existence after being punched by stan.
ford’s mind is a bleak white landscape with a single wooden door. when bill opens it, he’s greeted by stan playing paddleball inside the mystery shack. stan reveals that while the demon was chasing dipper and mabel, he and ford swapped clothes and pretended to be each other so that bill would enter the wrong mind. in the real world, ford takes out the memory gun, setting it to erase stan’s memory completely. in the mindscape, bill tries to call t
after the credits, bill cipher’s petrified form is shown in live action, isolated deep in a forest.

 potential return 
although bill was erased from existence by ford and stan, it is strongly implied that he can revive himself somehow, as shortly before disappearing he relays a distorted message that when reversed says " heal me a-x-o-l-o-t-l! my time has come to burn! i invoke the ancient power that i may return!"

in one of the possible storylines of dipper and mabel and the curse of the time pirates' treasure!: select your own choose-venture, dipper and mabel end up in "the time and space between time and space," where they encounter a creature called the cipher hunt, where alex hirsch warns the treasure hunters never to shake the statue's hand, even though he should be dead (ironically, the group that found bill shook his hand), as well as stanley's final message to the hunters, beginning with him singing "we'll meet again" (what b
even more unsettling is the fact that the photo of alex's voices (stan, soos, and fiddleford) can be illuminated by a blacklight - this reveals bill, alive, saying "stay paranoid!" and adding his signature. this also happens when one illuminates the photo of the mystery shack cast standing around the seemingly lifeless statue - doing so causes the cast and the statue to glow while the words "trust no one!" appear.

it is unknown if the hunt is canon to the tv series.

more direct hints are given by two cryptograms in "gravity falls: lost legends", which is a "canon-ish"[11] source. in the story "comix up", when the gang enters "the grimdark chronicles", there are symbols of bill's symbol substitution cipher inscribed on six gravestones. 
personality
bill is a cunning, blasphemous, eccentric, insane, sociopathic, and physically irreverent demon who finds most things amusing, particularly if they cause distress or harm to others. he is outrageous and outlandish, as well as a quick talker and thinker. though he may come across as simply annoying, he shouldn't be underestimated; for when he is angered, he is a force to be reckoned with as he will unleash his near-omnipotent powers on those unfortunate enough to make him angry. when accused of b
bill is not one who believes in rules. instead, he follows his own selfish philosophy which means doing whatever he wants without care for the consequences. he thinks of laws and physics as senseless and displays an irresistible urge to break those rules down by causing absolute chaos however he can. the lives he ruins hold no merit to him and he finds amusement in tormenting and turning people's worlds upside-down. he also sees reality as an "illusion," and values its destruction.

when possessing dipper's body, bill is shown to be rather masochistic, hurting himself in various ways for the thrill of it, exclaiming that "pain is hilarious." he seems to have little knowledge about the human body, specifically its physical limits. this comes back at him when he fights mabel over journal 3, as he eventually falls down, exhausted.

in "weirdmageddon part 1," he shows sadistic tendencies, such as when he shuffles "the function of every hole in preston northwest's face" and in "weirdmageddon 3: take back the falls" when he decides to kill one of the pines twins "just for the heck of it."

appearance
bill is a yellow, triangular creature who bears a strong resemblance to the reverse side of the great seal of the united states, which in turn consists of the eye of providence and an unfinished egyptian pyramid. the color of his body briefly becomes
he has a single large eye rimmed with four short black lashes on the top and bottom, though sometimes he has 3 on the top and 4 on the bottom. he moves around mostly by floating about, and rarely actually stands on his own two feet. he has thin, black limbs, wears a small, black bow tie, and a tall, thin, black top hat that floats just above his head. his arms do not seem to be in any fixed position, and can move along the perimeter of his body without any difficulty. he occasionally carries a s
in the book dipper and mabel and the curse of the time pirates' treasure!: select your own choose-venture it is strongly implied by the axolotl's poem about bill that he's an equilateral triangle: the first verse says "sixty degree
summoning ritual
to summon bill cipher, one needs a picture of one's intended victim. the eyes must be crossed out and the picture must be surrounded by eight candles in a circular formation. then the following incantation must be recited: "triangulum, entangulum. meteforis dominus ventium. meteforis venetisarium!" your eyes will glow blue. the sky will turn grey as you enter the mindscape. you'll say "backwards message" in reverse 5 times. a triangle appears. one eye opens and it turns into bill's normal
preventing bill's chaos
in order to prevent bill's chaos inside someone's mind, one must light nine candles and place one's hand on the victim's forehead. say the following incantation: "videntis omnium. magister mentium. magnesium ad hominem. magnum opus. habeus corpus. inceptus nolanus overratus. magister mentium. magister mentium. magister mentium." one's eyes will then turn blue and one will be brought to the victim's mind the way one pictures it. one will then have to find a way to stop bill oneself.

there are also three known preemptive methods to stop bill from entering minds. the first known method is a shielding spell that involves moonstones, mercury, and unicorn hair, which also protects against bill's chaos when he gains corporeality. the second method is placing a physical barrier around the mind, such as ford's metal plate, though ford stated it's not the safest method. the last method is "encrypting" a subject's thoughts, making them too difficult for bill to read. it is safer than
the cipher file
a page depicting how bill enters a person's mind.
stanford pines has a file containing information on bill cipher and various sightings of him throughout history. the file contains pictures and a page ripped out of a book, with images of a pyramid (presumably in egypt) and the eye of providence. another page in the file is titled "alligans contractus" (which is latin for "binding contract" with a picture of an old man shaking bill's hand, both of which are surrounded 
left: book excerpt right: examples of sightings
left: alligans contractus right: book excerpt
the page ripped out of a book ("book excerpt" on images to the right) reads:

 journal 3 
in journal 3, behind bill's name, is a message encrypted with a symbol substitution cipher. when decoded it reads: "liar. monster. snappy dresser."

abilities
bill is described as a "dream demon", displaying some of the characteristics historically attributed to demons, like the creation of contracts.

 in the mindscape 
as bill can't access the third dimension physically at first, summoning him seems to put the people around him into a sleep-like trance that allows him to manifest. the people observing are unaware they've fallen asleep until bill leaves, after which they usually awake with a jolt. bill can also enter another person's mind through that person's dreams.

once within the trance, or within someone's mindscape, bill's powers are vastly magnified; he becomes capable of changing his appearance, changing the appearance of other people's dream selves, and changing the area at will. he can also pluck information from any others who are also inside and bring those ideas and images to life, as was the case with xyler and craz. bill can communicate with his summoner using his body as the screen of a
as bill often mentions, he is close to omniscient: he knows the truth of many well-known conspiracies and can see the future (such as the destruction of the gideon-bot and that gideon gleeful would go to prison), an ability he often flaunts by offering to tell a person the exact time, date and cause of that person's death - he seemingly predict
bill (middle) possessing dipper.
bill also has the ability to remove people's minds from their bodies, taking possession of the empty body himself. the real owner of the body is stuck in a ghost-like form within the mindscape, unable to affect the rest of the world unless that person finds a vessel. this vessel doesn't have to be a living thing, as revealed when dipper used a puppet of himself to communicate with mabel while stuck as a disembodied spirit.

despite his vast knowledge and abilities, bill has limitations. he must be summoned in order to appear first: he vanished from gravity falls once ford disappeared, and only manifested again after gideon summoned him once more, even remarking that he hadn't been there "in a while." he can only access bodies and conscious minds if he is allowed to through a contract, which involves agreeing to certain terms and shaking bill's hand. being well aware of this, bill is known to twist and manipulate th
his vast powers are also strictly limited to dreams and the mindscape: his powers do not migrate into his host body and can't affect the physical world.

 in physical form 
after smashing the inter-dimensional rift and creating a gateway from the nightmare realm, bill became incarnate, which allowed him to both exist and affect the real world.

in his physical form, bill is nigh omnipotent, bringing inanimate objects to life and turning people into statues of the material of his choice. he can regenerate every aspect of himself, create everything from objects to elaborate pocket dimensions (like mabel's prison bubble) and produce electric charges (shot from his eye). his abilities in this form also include: apportation, inter-universal travel, matter manipulation, telekinesis, pyrokinesis, time manipulation, telepathy, mind control, il
however, even an incarnate bill discovered limitations in his power. bill's physical eye proved particularly sensitive and took more time than the rest of him to regrow. even while capable of vastly affecting the physical world, he still could not enter bodies or conscious minds without the contract-and-handshake process. gravity falls' bubble of weirdness also thwarted bill's powers, as no amount of hitting or shooting at it dissolved the barrier, which stopped weirdmageddon from advancing into
the prophecy of the zodiac hung heaviest of all over bill's mind. this prophecy explained that if ten particular individuals gathered in the circle designed by the ancients who had known bill, they would be able to stop him; however, this would not come to pass if any of them broke the chain.

despite this, bill's own ego proved to be his most fatal flaw, as it led him to underestimate the "mortals": he failed to recognize stan's trick, driven by the possibility of learning how to bypass the bubble over gravity falls, and did not realize he was at his most fragile while in the mindscape. his elimination also revealed that, while in the mindscape, he was as vulnerable to erasure via the memory gun as all other thoughts.

cameos
the following are sightings of bill and the eye of providence outside his physical appearance.

 season 1 
season 2
bill cipher in rick and morty.
 outside of gravity falls 
sightings
season 1
shorts
season 2
games
 quotes 
"gravity falls, it is good to be back!"—bill cipher[source]

"it's funny how dumb you are!"—bill cipher[source]

"remember! reality is an illusion, the universe is a hologram, buy gold, bye!"—bill cipher[source]

"you! you can't even imagine what you just cost me! do you have any idea what i'm like when i'm mad?"—bill cipher[source]

"eat nightmares!"—bill cipher[source]

"sure i am, what's your point?"—bill to gideon after he calls him insane[source]

"a darkness approaches. a day will come in the future where everything you care about will change... until then i'll be watching you! i'll be watching you..."—bill cipher[source]

"sorry kid, but you're my puppet now!"—bill after possessing dipper's body[source]

"you can't stop me! i'm a being of pure energy with no weakness!"—bill cipher[source]

"for one trillion years i've been trapped in my own decaying dimension, waiting for a new universe to call my own. name's bill! but you can call me your new lord and master for all of eternity!"—bill cipher[source]

"don't toy around with me shooting star! i... see... everything!"—bill cipher[source]

"you're making a mistake!! i'll give you anything: money, fame, riches, infinite power, your own galaxy, please!"—bill cipher[source]

"i've got some children i need to turn into corpses!!!"— bill after turning into his monster form.

trivia
alex hirsch with the real-life bill cipher statue.
a picture of an unknown language with its alphabet depicted on bill cipher.
gallery
references
site navigation
site navigation

		start a discussion
		discussions about bill cipher	

						
							favorite antagonist?						
					

						
							if you want gravity falls season 3 click here						
					
languages: 
fan feed		

			
				<path d="m32.003 16.524c0 .288-.115.564-.32.768l18.3 30.712c-.226.224-.454.324-.738.324-.292 0-.55-.11-.77-.325l-.943-.886a.41.41 0 0 1-.01-.59l15.45-15.46c.262-.263.716-.078.716.29v2.46z
explore
follow us
overview
community
the fandom app
advertise
