vaquita | species | wwf
vaquita
facts
map data provided by iucn.
vaquita, the world&rsquo;s most rare marine mammal, is on the edge of extinction. this little porpoise wasn't discovered until 1958 and a little over half a century later, we are on the brink of losing them forever. vaquita are often caught and drowned in gillnets used by illegal fishing operations in marine protected areas within mexico's gulf of california. the population has dropped drastically in the last few years.the vaquita has a large dark ring around its eyes and dark patches 
&nbsp;
celebrating the biggest conservation wins of 2017
as 2017 comes to a close, we&rsquo;re taking a moment to highlight some of our biggest conservation successes of the year. and we couldn&rsquo;t have done it without your support.
why they matter

the vaquita is the most endangered cetacean in the world. with as few as 30 left, the species will become extinct without a fully enforced gillnet ban throughout their entire range. wwf urgently working to ensure they can live and thrive in their natural habitat.
threats
no reasonable doubt that the last individual has died
known only to survive in cultivation, in captivity or as a naturalised population
facing an extremely high risk of extinction in the wild
facing a high risk of extinction in the wild
facing a high risk of extinction in the wild
likely to qualify for a threatened category in the near future
does not qualify for critically endangered, endangered, vulnerable, or near threatened
a fishing boat in the gulf of california.
the vaquita will be extinct, possibly by 2018, if fishery bycatch is not eliminated immediately. nearly one out of every five vaquita get entangled and drown in gillnets intended for other marine species like the totoaba, a critically endangered fish also found in the upper gulf of california. entanglement in gillnets set for totoaba was the primary cause that brought the vaquita to low levels by the mid-1970s. totoaba were overfished by the mid-1970s and were listed as endangered by mexico in 1
what wwf is doing
&#39;ghost net&#39; retrieval and acoustic monitoring
wwf&rsquo;s goal is to achieve a gillnet-free upper gulf of california where wild vaquita can thrive. in order to protect&nbsp;the vaquita&rsquo;s native habitat, we closely collaborate with partners to support:
international cooperation to boost vaquita-safe fishing
in july 2016, president barack obama and president enrique pe&ntilde;a nieto of mexico announced billateral collaboration measures to protect the vaquita. as a follow up to this meeting and to the recommendations cirva presented in its vaquita report,&nbsp;mexico's national institute of fisheries (inapesca) and wwf mexico established an international committee of experts to further develop and urgently implement vaquita-safe fishing technologies.
the experts committee will advise the mexican government on improving fishing techniques not harmful to vaquita, including those that inapesca and wwf mexico have together developed over the last years.
this independent committee has been charged with improving existing vaquita-safe fishing technologies (such as the small trawl to catch shrimp and traps and other gear for fish) to substitute gillnets which will be permanently prohibited starting september in the upper gulf of california, the only place on earth where the vaquita exists.
the committee is comprised of experts from texas a&amp;m university, noaa south east fisheries center, swedish university of agriculture science, technological university of denmark, canada's fisheries and marine institute, new england aquarium, fao,&nbsp;inapesca and wwf.
a protocol and guidelines to catch shrimp with vaquita-safe technology is expected to be ready soon.&nbsp;
saving the last of the vaquitas
wwf is on red alert after the most recent&nbsp;report&nbsp;from the international committee for the recovery of the vaquita (cirva) estimated the vaquita population at&nbsp;no more than 30. in the past, wwf has helped study vaquitas and implement protective measures with the mexican government and local partners. we have been working with mexican scientists, government representatives, and o
we are now calling for urgent and immediate measures to save the last of the vaquitas.
based on expert recommendations, wwf calls on the mexican government to strongly enforce a ban on gillnet fisheries throughout the entire range of the species starting in september 2014. we also ask that the us and china help stamp out the illegal trade in totoaba products and provide enforcement support to the mexican government, without which vaquitas will go the way of the dodo.
&nbsp;
all vaquita photos on this page by thomas a. jefferson from the joint research project with the marine mammals research and conservation coordination of the national institute of ecology of mexico. photo obtained under permit no. dr7488708 of semarnat (mexican national commission of protected natural areas).

publications


vanishing vaquita: saving the world’s most endangered marine mammal


report: 5th meeting of the international committee for the recovery of the vaquita (cirva) 

experts
how you can help

support wwf

show your love of the tiger with the wwf bankamericard cash rewards visa credit card. bank of america will contribute $100 to wwf for each account opened and activated.

adopt an animal

make a symbolic animal adoption to help save some of the world's most endangered animals from extinction and support wwf's conservation efforts.
related species
get the latest conservation news with wwf email.

already have a wwf account?


world wildlife fund
1250 24th street, n.w.
washington, dc 20037

&copy; 2019 world wildlife fund
