bill cipher | disney wiki | fandom powered by wikia
fandom
bill cipher
bill cipher
background information
television programs
video games
voice
inspiration
lumino demonian (apperance)
character information
other names
personality
appearance
occupation
alignment
goal
home
relatives
allies
minions
enemies
likes
dislikes
powers and abilities
paraphernalia
fate
quote
bill cipher is the main antagonist of gravity falls. he is a dream-demon with mysterious motives, and seems to have a vendetta against the pines family, especially stanford pines.

contents
background
bill is an ancient demon who's older then the galaxy and far greater than other nightmare beings. bill once lived in the second dimension, a place that he soon got hailed over and described of it as a "flat world with flat minds and flat ideas." bill then became determined of spreading chaos and destruction, which forced him to "liberate" his dimension by destroying everything there, including his own parents. eventually, he found his way to the gravity falls, oregon. the people discovered that bill was too dangerous and found a way to defeat him using a zodiac with ten different symbols. the people left behind a painting depicting their encounter with
bill then had ford build a machine that he claimed would benefit mankind, but in reality it was a portal for the demon to enter the 3rd dimension. however, one of ford's human friends, fiddleford mcgucket, discovered the true nature of the portal and warned ford before completing their project. horrified and betrayed, ford shut down the project and hid sightings
before his debut in "dreamscaperers", bill appeared frequently in gravity falls. he was an unseen character who wrote the cryptograms in the online game rumble's revenge. his name and existence is deduced by taking all the capital letters in the cryptograms from opening theme. this is partially an image from his entry in book 2. encircling him are various symbols that can link to various characters in the show. most notably, when he appears physically for the first time, he refers to dipper, mabel, and soos, as "pine tree, shooting star, and question mark" respectively. the entry also makes special note of his association wit
in book 3, the text says "why is he watching me?" and "bill has proven himself to be one of the friendliest and most trustworthy individuals that i've ever encountered in my life. what a guy! i honestly couldn't trust him more. not evil in any way. bill is a true gentleman." however, the second part is crossed out in red ink. on the next page is "do not summon at all costs!" in red block letters, the rest of the page splatted with a dark red substance.

physical appearance
bill is a triangle with a pyramid design, therefore resembling the illuminati symbol or the eye of providence, with an eye in the middle. among the bottom part of his body is the a brick pattern. in the theme song, bill has a top hat on, a bow tie, and stick arms and legs, but lacks them in 
personality
bill, quite simply, was a master manipulator able to adapt, manipulate, and deceive others through the use of flattery, promises, mind control or dealings throughout making himself and his objective a mystery. despite his insane and sadistic ways, bill was affable, if not obnoxious, to other, but this is only one of the many facades of his unpredictable personality; he is willing to betray, lie, and submit others to a life of misery and torment for his own amusement and shamelessly go back on hi
bill also had a weird and rather sadistic sense of humor. this is displayed during his joyous and maniacal laughter in the face of other peoples and his own pain, such as ripping the teeth out of a deer and presenting it as a gift to gideon, switching around every hole on northwest's face and was after taking control of dipper's body, described "pain as hilarious" whilst continuously self-harming, showing he was also masochistic. this doesn't, however, explain why the axolotl said, "says he's ha
despite his treacherous nature, bill does have a (twisted) sense of honor. he will follow through on deals and keep his word, assuming if he in the mood for it but strongly prefers the immoral way and largely feels no incentive or debt for anything. gratuitously, he allowed gideon control over gravity falls after he took a physical form and control of the world. outside of this, bill displayed a willingness to go against his own rules, preparing to invade ford's mind without his consent, before 
despite his confident nature, if bill gets caught in a helpless situation, he'll go into a deep panic, as when bill was tricked into entering stan's mind and was about to be erased from existence, bill desperately tried to bargain with stan by offering to give him money, fame, riches, infinite power, and even his own galaxy.

abilities
role in the series
"dreamscaperers" is the first time bill is directly addressed and introduced in the series. gideon gleeful, in an attempt to take over the mystery shack once again, summons him. gideon tells him to steal stan's safe combination directly from his head, so that gideon can steal the shack's deed. bill imme
bill in journal 2.
once inside stan's head, bill confronts the trio and brags that he knows what they're all thinking. to prove his statement, he summons xyler and craz from mabel's imagination. he tricks mabel and her two dream guys into looking for the memory of stan's safe combination first, knowing they would lead him straight to it. at some point, soos is separated from everyone else, and bill takes his place. once they find the correct memory he takes
bill gets mad at soos, mabel, and dipper.
bill reappears again in "sock opera" for the first time in season 2, when dipper is trying to figure out the password for the laptop from the former episode, "into the bunker". he offers the laptop's password in return for the favor he wants, but dipper refuses the offer. later, at the moment the laptop is on countdown
he then follows mabel to her puppet show in pursuit of dipper's journal that is being used as a prop in the show. after mabel has been informed of dipper's body having been stolen by him, he finds her with the journal as she is retrieving it for dipper. he almost swindles her out of it but ends up in a fight with her. he ends up losing because mabel uses dipper's physical weakness and exhaustion to her advantage. as he collapses, he is thrust out of dipper's body. bill possesses the dipper puppe
bill briefly appears in ford's dream during the episode "the last mabelcorn", warning him about the end of the world that is coming. in this episode, it is revealed that bill originates from an alternate dimension known as the nightmare realm.

he appears again in "dipper and mabel vs. the future", where he possesses blendin blandin and tricks mabel into giving him the interdimensional rift, which he eventually destroys, beginning the end of the world. bill then takes on a physical form and begins wreaking havoc on gravity falls. he traps mabel in an enormous bubble, melts the statue of
bill "is destroyed" by stanley pines
following his demise, everyone is free from the tapestries as weirdmageddon immediately then winds to an end when the henchmaniacs are forcibly sucked back into the nightmare realm with all the chaos, from where they had came and soon the entire valley and town of gravity falls is then restored as everything returns back to the way it was before the whole tragedy even began. shortly after, the only thing that remains of bill cipher after the event is his petrified body now lying isolated somewhe
gallery
trivia
external links


season two: scary-oke • into the bunker • the golf war • sock opera • soo

		start a discussion
		discussions about bill cipher	

						
							gravity falls returning?						
					

						
							what stan and gideon represents						
					
languages: 
fan feed		

			
				<path d="m32.003 16.524c0 .288-.115.564-.32.768l18.3 30.712c-.226.224-.454.324-.738.324-.292 0-.55-.11-.77-.325l-.943-.886a.41.41 0 0 1-.01-.59l15.45-15.46c.262-.263.716-.078.716.29v2.46z
explore
follow us
overview
community
the fandom app
advertise
