taza - wikipedia
taza
taza (berber: ⵜⴰⵣⴰ, taza, in arabic: تازة) is a city in northern morocco, which occupies the corridor between the rif mountains and middle atlas mountains, about 120&#160;km east of fez and 210&#160;km west of history[edit]
historically taza was known first as ' ribāt taza رباط تازة ' , a military camp belongs to the fatimid state , was founded by the local governor mussa ibn aby alaâfiya موسى بن أبي العافية  who was the leader of miknassa tribe &#91;3&#93; too. up to at least the early 20th century, taza was considerable tr
geography[edit]
taza is located in north-central morocco, in the south of the rif region right outside the mountain range on a narrow plain. the city is composed of two formerly separate towns built on separate terraces overlooking a mountain valley. the old-taza town is at an elevation of 1,919 feet (585 m) above sea level and is surrounded by fortifications; the newer town, established by the french in 1920, is located in a fertile plain at an elevation of 1,460 feet (445 m
the city is located in a mountain pass known as the "taza gap", where the rif mountains and the middle-atlas range come together. through this pass successive waves of invaders moved westward onto the atlantic coastal plains of northwestern africa. taza was first settled by miknasa tribesmen, who gave it its name: miknasa taza, similar to miknasa al-zeitoun (present-day meknes, another miknasa set
climate[edit]
köppen-geiger climate classification system classifies its climate as hot-summer mediterranean (csa).&#91;7&#93; located along the atlas 
sights[edit]
the old town's main thoroughfare is enlivened by the grain market and the souks where wickerwork, tapestries, jewelry, ... the road terminates at a square doubling as a parade ground which sports the al-andalous mosque. the mosque's minaret, constructed in the 14th century, is wider at the top than at its base.
bab el-qebbour street crosses the kissaria (covered marketplace), then leads on to the market mosque where it meets up with bab j
topology[edit]
the topology of the area has imposed a pattern of urban spread. viewed from above, the city takes the form of a "t". it has its root in taza high and stretches north to reach the bed of the oued larbaâ. since the urban stretches east and west along the n6 between fez and oujda.

at the dawn of independence, the city consisted of the medina high taza, the european district occupying almost hill called "no adrar illouz. people usually pronounce draâ louz. this area became the center of town, and finally the station area a few kilometers below.

during the following years (60s, 70s) districts have emerged, midway between downtown and the train station (bit goulem, ourida, bin-jradi).

during the 80s, other districts make their appearance, especially north of the city (and massira al-quds), extended and developed areas today. the goal of this extension was the slum clearance. it was a success, since 1986 the city was declared a city without slums. the craze is such that sections like (massira ii) are villa style.

the 90s marked the beginning of the urbanization of the axis center - taza above. these are buildings with 6 or 7 floors occupying a strategic content between public facilities (municipality, space, civil protection, hospital ibn baja, high school and college ...) and on the other hand, it is down the high rock a hundred yards. this area is also adjacent to the uptown-qessou meddah, friouato and hay shuhada (developed throughout the last three decades).

more recently this area continues to morph and promises a beautiful view from the heights of the city. the planning now also spread on the road to fez for several kilometers to reach the intermittently r508 (about tainast).

the development plan provides a direct link between taza west (at the "white bridge") and taza high.

see also[edit]
notes[edit]


external links[edit]
navigation menu
personal tools
namespaces

							variants
						
views
more

							search
						
navigation
interaction
tools
print/export
in other projects
languages
